In this lecture we will consider delegates with you, what they are, what types they are.
We will teach the BaseGeometryActor class to send events, and the hub class to subscribe to these events
and, depending on the type of event, execute some specific logic.
Before we start working with delegates, let's take a look at the additional UPROPERTY specifier.
It is called BlueprintReadWrite. This specifier allows you to access the property on the blueprint graph.
Add this specifier to all properties of the GeometryData structure.
We will not add to the TimerRate property and see what the difference is.
We also need access to the GeometryData in the hub class. So let's create a getter function for this object.
The function will return a copy of the object.
It will also have a const specifier, because it does not change the class state.
Let's make this function also available in blueprints. For this, the unreal engine has a
special macro called UFUNCTION.
The UFUNCTION parameters need to specify a qualifier called BlueprintCallable.
Thanks to this, we can call the GetGeometryData function from the blueprint of the graph.
We compile the project. Let's see how it all looks in the editor.
Open the blueprint CubeGeometryActor.
Let's check that we have access to the function and our GeometryData object.
To do this, anywhere in the graph, right-click and enter GeometryData in the search.
In the filtered information, we see that the GeometryData function is available to us, in which we specified the BlueprintReadWrite specifier
and also pass the GeometryData. It is located in the protected section.
This blueprint is the inheritor of our main class, so we have access to it.
In the upper right corner you can also see from which class this blueprint is inherited.
If you pull the thread from the Return Value pin, you can access all the fields of the structure.
To do this, call the Break GeometryData node.
In this node, we see that we have access to all fields of the structure, except for the TimerRate field.
For this property, we did not specify BlueprintReadWrite, so it is not available in this node.
Thanks to this specifier, we can read these variables and also change their values.
There is an additional qualifier called BlueprintReadOnly,
which only permits reading the values ​​of a variable in blueprints.
You can access variables in a different way. Right click on return value
and select split struct pin from the menu. It looks more concise - we don't need an additional break node
to access structure changes. Another way to access class variables
is to click on the eye button in the My Blueprint window and select the checkbox: show inherited variables.
Thanks to this, in the variables section we will be able to find our GeometryData variable and with the mouse button held down, we can
directly drag it onto the blueprint graph. A mini window opens in which you can select either a setter for this variable, or a getter.
Moving on to the delegates. Delegates allow you to store a reference
to a method with a specific signature of an arbitrary class and call this method when necessary.
You and I used delegates when we created our timer. We passed the timer to the manager with the OnTimerFired function,
and every time the timer was fired, the timer manager called our function.
Let's create our own delegate. To do this, go to the GeometryActor header file and
declare our first delegate at the very top of the class. This is done with the DECLARE_DELEGATE macro
Let's press F12 on it. We have opened the DeleagateCombinations file, where all the macros that we can
use to declare our delegates are defined . The simplest version is DECLARE_DELEGATE - it takes
one parameter DelegateName - this is an arbitrary name that we can give our delegate
This delegate is available only in C ++, one client can subscribe to it,
that is, this is the simplest form of delegate. Go ahead. MULTICAST_DELEGATE is the same as the
first one, only many clients can subscribe to it. The next delegate is DYNAMIC.
This delegate differs from the first in that this type of delegate is available in blueprints.
multicast - respectively, in blueprints and several clients can be written (in C ++ it is also available).
The following are various combinations of these delegates with parameters. That is, we
see _OneParam, _TwoParams, and so on up to _NineParams.
Let's declare two delegates. 1 delegate will be called for us when the color of the material of our actor has changed.
It will have two parameters - this color and a name. The second delegate will be called when the color
change timer has finished completely. The delegate will have one parameter, which is a pointer to the current GeometryActor.
We declare DYNAMIC_MULTICAST_DELEGATE. Several clients can subscribe to it.
It will be available in blueprints and will also have two parameters.
The delegate will have the name FOnColoredChanged
The names of all delegates in unreal must start with a capital letter F - this is a requirement of unreal.
The next argument to the macro is the type of the first parameter of the delegate.
The first parameter will be color. We use the FLinearColor type.
The next argument is the name of the first parameter. This is a purely cosmetic parameter.
It is needed exclusively for displaying the parameter name in blueprints.
The next argument is the type of the second parameter. We will return the name of the actor.
Therefore, we will use the FString type. And the last argument is the name of the second parameter in blueprints.
Let's declare a second delegate. Copy the entire macro, remove the DYNAMIC from the name. This delegate will
only be available in C ++. And it will also have one parameter. Therefore, we change TwoParams to OneParam.
Let's call our delegate FOnTimerFinished.
The parameter type of this delegate will be a pointer to an actor. We will return a pointer to the current BaseGeometryActor.
And since this delegate is only available in C ++, we do not need to specify a parameter that is responsible
for the name of the variable in blueprints. We have declared the delegates, determined how they will look like in our country.
Now they need to be created in the BaseGeometryActor class. We create the OnColorChanged delegate.
And so is the second delegate OnTimerFinished. Add them to the public section of the BaseGeometryActor.
To subscribe to the OnColorChanged delegate in blueprints, it must be marked with the UPROPERTY macro.
And for UPROPERTY, specify a qualifier called BlueprintAssignable.
Very soon we will see how it all looks on the blueprint graph.
The last step left for us is to call these delegates directly.
We will do this in the OnTimerFired function. The first delegate will fire when the color of the material changes.
In order to call all functions that are subscribed to this delegate, you need to call the delegate function called Broadcast.
We see that it has parameters that we defined in the delegate signature.
The first parameter is this color, and the second is the name of the actor. We can pass the value
returned by the GetName function to it. The second delegate will fire when the timer has finished running.
As a parameter, we will pass a pointer to the current actor, for this we will use the this keyword.
First, let's see how you can subscribe to the OnColorChanged delegate in blueprints,
and then subscribe to both delegates in the GeometryHub class.
We compile the project.
Let's open the CubeGeometryActor blueprint. If the graph does not open automatically, then click on the Open Full Blueprint Editor button.
Usually the graph does not open automatically if there are no changes to it.
Let's subscribe to the OnColorChanged delegate of the BeginPlay function. Pull the thread from the back and enter assign in the input field.
Find our delegate OnColorChanged in the list. We select it.
2 nodes were automatically created. The first is called bind, which adds the OnColoredChanged Event
function to our delegate. That is, we will hit this event every time the
delegate's Broadcast function is called. We see that the function has two parameters: color and name.
We specified these names in the delegate signature. Let's print the color and name of the actor on the screen.
To do this, we will use a function called PrintString.
This node calls the AddOnScreenDebugMessage function, which we have already considered.
We need to concatenate a string of color and name. To do this, we will use a special node
called Append. Add a name to the first pin. We can also add an additional pin for one more line.
And for example, let's add some kind of separator. In the third pin, we display the color.
A node for converting color to string was automatically created. And we connect the final string to PrintString.
Let's remove the BaseGeometryActor we have from the scene and edit hub a little.
We clear the property GeometryClass. As a result, 10 actors will not be spawned.
And also in GeometryPayloads we will leave only one element of the array. We are doing all this so that a
bunch of messages from different actors on the screen are not saddened. For the element, click on the triangle and select the
delete option. That is, in fact, only one geometry actor will spawn on the stage.
Also let's change the TimerRate so that the color changes, for example, every second. Save and run the game.
Our code works. The name of the actor and the changed color of the material are printed on the screen.
Now, let's subscribe to the BaseGeometry delegates for the actor in the hub class. To begin with, in the hub header file
, we will declare two functions that will be called when the corresponding delegates are triggered.
Let's call the first function OnColoredChanged. The function signature must match the delegate signature.
And the second function OnTimerFinished. We create a body for each function in a .cpp file.
Let's add our own log category GeometryHub to the actor.
In the OnColorChanged function, let's print the color and name of the actor to the console.
And we will also display a message when the timer has finished working. Copy log.
Change Verbosity to Error so that the text in the console is highlighted in red.
Let's print Timer finished. Additionally, let's display the name of the actor. To do this, we will use the GetName function.
Also, before outputting, check that the pointer to actor is
not null. If it is zero, then we immediately exit the function.
And the last thing we need to do is bind these functions to the corresponding delegates.
On BeginPlay, you can comment out the first and second spawns - we don't need them.
So, let's move on to the third spawn function. We create an actor, change its GeometryData and end spawn.
Before we finish spawn, we can bind our functions.
The first OnColorChanged delegate is dynamic.
To add a function to a dynamic delegate,
you need to use a special macro called AddDynamic.
The macro takes 2 parameters. The first is a pointer to an object, and the second is a reference to the function of
this object, which we will call when the delegate is triggered.
The first parameter is this - a pointer to the current object of the GeometryHubActor class.
And the second parameter is a reference to the OnColorChanged function.
And we also need to add a second function.
The OnTimerFinished delegate is not dynamic.
To add functions to this kind of delegate, use the AddUObject function.
Its parameters are the same: a pointer to an object and a reference to a function.
So, we have made a bind for two functions. Launch editor. Let's see how it all looks.
Press the play button and the program has stopped.
Let's see what happened. The code stopped due to assertion. Let's see what is written in the message text.
The message says that it is not possible to bind the delegate because the callback
function is not marked with the UFUNCTION macro.
This message is for a dynamic delegate. Let's fix the error. Go to the header file GeometryHubActor.
And add UFUNCTION above the OnColorChanged function. Why this is needed we will talk a little later at the end of this section,
but for now we will keep in mind that the function that we add to dynamic delegates
must be marked with UFUNCTION macros. In this case, UFUNCTION macros are irrelevant
to whether we want to call the given function in blueprints or not. It has to do with the engine memory model.
Press the continue button. Ignore. Stop the game and recompile the project in the editor.
Let's open the log. Let's clean it up. And let's re-launch our project.
GeometryHub functions are called. A log is printed with the actor name and new material color.
And at the very end, the GeometryHub log says that the timer has finished working.
Let's take a look at a couple more things now. When we call the Broadcast function of our delegate,
we pass the pointer to the current actor as a parameter, that is, in fact, a pointer to
BaseGeometryActor, but in the delegate signature we specified the parameter as a pointer to the base
class of the actor - AActor. In fact, when the Broadcast function is called, an automatic
up-cast occurs - the conversion of a pointer from ABaseGeometryActor to a pointer to just AActor.
You and I, of course, can change the signature of the delegate and explicitly indicate the signature ABaseGeometryActor.
We'll do it differently. And we ourselves convert pointers to AActor to pointer to ABaseGeometryActor.
To do this, Unreal has a special function called Cast.
In fact, it does a dawn-cast and convert a pointer to a base class to a pointer to a derived class.
The function is template. As a template parameter, it accepts the type to which the pointer needs to be converted.
Check the converted pointer to nullptr, if the result is a null pointer, then exit the function immediately,
and if not, let's print some message.
And we will output, for example, the value of the amplitude from the GeometryData object.
To do this, we can use the function that we created at the beginning of this lesson - GetGeometryData.
And we turn to the Amplitude field. As a practice, I suggest you create a special function ToString for the GeometryData structure.
And program it in such a way that it prints all the fields of this structure.
In the log, I made a mistake in the word Display and also put a bracket in the wrong place.
Let's see how we can remove an actor from the scene. To do this, actors have a special function
called Destroy. Alternatively, you can do this with a function called SetLifeSpan.
This function takes one parameter - this is the number of seconds after how long the actor
will be removed. That is, in fact, this function starts a timer, and when this
timer fires, the Destroy function is called. Let's comment out the second call. Consider another actor function
called EndPlay. Let's press F12 on the actor class. In the search, enter EndPlay.
This function is called on the actor before it is removed from the scene.
Let's override it in the BaseGeometryActor class.
We declare it in the protected section. And add the override keyword.
Create the body of the function in a .cpp file.
We also need to call the base class function via the Super keyword so that we don't lose any functionality.
And let's just print a message in this function that the actor has been destroyed.
Set the logging level to Error.
Compile the project, run editor.
Open the log, clear and run the game.
We are waiting for a while.
So, we look at the latest logs. A message was displayed that the timer was stopped, then the timer was completed.
After that, pointer conversion was successful. Next, we call the Destroy function of the actor.
And the message of the EndPlay function was printed. The actor left the stage. Let's take another look.
We aim the camera at the cube. And that's all - the cube is gone.